Going through your pantry or your refrigerator is often a positive experience as you treat yourself with something delicious. But, every now and then, you may have discovered that you've left an item of food unattended for too long. Something that, if you do not eat today, you probably never will. Perhaps it was that fresh meat you had bought, but were too tired to cook a couple of days ago. Or perhaps you purchased several meals worth of healthy greens to jump start that new diet that you never followed. Whatever the ingredient, whatever the circumstance, Use It Or Lose It is here to help!

All you have to do is click this link to reach our GitHub page, then fork and clone the file to get set up. Make sure your Terminal is in the file's directory so you can open and run the file. Once you've opened the file, you just need to type into your Terminal: 

ruby bin/run.rb

And you are one step further from Losing It!

First, you are going to be asked for your username. Usernames are case sensitive, so make sure to type in the exact username that you want going forward. If you've Used It before, our database will acknowledge that you have an account under your username. If you're a first time user, that is great as well - either way, we are just going to confirm that you have the correct username before we continue. All you have to do is type "y" then press enter if you want to continue (or just hit enter without typing in anything) and type "n" then enter if you would like to choose a different username. 

If you are new to Use It Or Lose It, you will be asked to enter all of the items into your virtual Pantry. Items can be any food that you fear you will Lose or simply another ingredient that you may want to add to your search (or future searches). If you are a returning user, your Pantry will be the same as when you left it - minus the items from your last search that you were either going to Use Or Lose. To help ensure that your search goes without a hitch, please make sure to put a comma and space between each item in your pantry. 
Example: kale, eggs, peanut butter, chocolate ice cream

Just type in your pantry items and hit enter. Please note that entering zero items will force you to quit the program, so, if you're a returning user and your pantry is perfect, just re-enter one of the items that you have already entered into your Pantry, and Use It Or Lose It will make sure to Lose the redunancy. 

Before we move on, we want to make sure that your Pantry is up to date. You will have options to choose from, all you have to do is scroll up or down and hit enter. If you want to add any items you can do so (when I'm in a Use It Or Lose It scenario, I've already forgotten about the item once after all). You also have the option to clear out your Pantry and start again by choosing to Redo your Pantry. If you have forgotten any items, misspelled an item, or added an item that, actually, isn't food, you can choose to remove them. If you decide to remove items, they will appear in alphabetical order. You can scroll down and use the space bar to select (or deselect) the item or even multiple items, then press enter when you are done. We also understand that, sometimes, you may be better off with Losing It so there is a quit option as well. Whatever you choose to do, we will give you the option to alter your Pantry until you decide to Continue to the next step.

Now, the moment of truth. From your Pantry, you will select the items that you must Use as well as any other items that you would like to add to your search. Similar to deleting from your Pantry in the previous step, the ingredients will be in alphabetical order, you can scroll up and down, and use the space bar to select (or deselect) your item (or items) for your Use It Or Lose It search. After you press enter, we will double-check that you have selected the correct items. You can type "n" then press enter to go back to redo your selection or type "y" then press enter to confirm the start your Use It Or Lose It Search. (Note: You can enter nothing into your search, but the result will, predictably, come up with zero results. You can nonethless use this empty search method if you simply want to move more quickly towards the Cookbook option below). 

Once initiated, our database - thanks to our good friends at Spoonacular - will run an immediate search, while trying to include as many of the ingredients that you selected. You will receive 10 recipes from which you can choose to save into your Cookbook. 1 to 10, you can save as many of the results into your Cookbook as you please. Similar to selecting your Use It Or Lose It Items, you will scroll up and down, use the space bar to select recipes of your choosing, then hit enter when you are done. After you make your selections, you'll have a chance to redo your Cookbook additions (type "n" then enter to redo your selections) or move on to the final phase (by typing "y" then enter).

We've found that the greatest cause of Losing It is procrastination. To ensure that you Use It, you are going to scroll through your Cookbook to select (by pressing enter) the one recipe that you will cook, today. Your Cookbook will contain all of your recipes, including those from previous searches, so you can pivot and pick a different recipe - though we recommend you pick a recipe from your Use It Or Lose It search.

As always, you'll be asked to confirm your selection (type "y" then enter), while given the opportunity to change it (type "n" then enter). Once you've made your final selection, you'll receive everything that you need. You will find the recipe name, a complete list of ingredients (with quantities), a url link to that recipe's website, a youtube link that will run a search for similar recipes, as well as the instructions on how to prepare, cook, and serve this amazing dish. 

Roughly 70 billion pounds of food is wasted per year in America. The average American will waste over six thousand pounds of food in their lifetime. Thanks to you and the many other members of Use It Or Lose It, we will help reduce waste and increase the consumption of delicious food.


